README.md, before:

# ISI Datamart

This git repository contains the ISI Datamart using REST endpoints.

The content of the Datamart is a set of datasets, which in turn consists of one or more variables. The Dataset Metadata Schema and the Variable Metadata schema are described here: [Metadata Schema](https://datamart-upload.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

The canonical data format used by the Datamart is the text delimited file (CSV). Details of the canonical data format and examples are here: [Canonical Data Format](https://datamart-upload.readthedocs.io/en/latest/download/)

Using the default configuration the Datamart REST URL is `http://localhost:14080/`. The details of the individual REST endpoints are described here: [Datamart REST API](https://datamart-upload.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/)

If for some reason your are running the development version of the Datamart, the URL is `http://localhost:5000/`

See examples in the Datamart Demo Jupyter notebook for sample usage: [Datamart Data API Demo](Datamart%20Data%20API%20Demo.ipynb)

## Installation

Edit the `docker/docker_config.py` file to change the Postgres user password.

Change to the `docker` directory and build the docker container.

    docker-compose build

This will build the backend container. It may take a while the first time you do it, as there are *a lot* of Python packages that need to be installed. Every time you change the source you should build the container again. Subsequent building runs will be faster.

## Running the System

Change to the `docker` directory and run

    docker-compose up

The docker compose yaml file, `docker-compose.yml`, uses docker compose version 3.7.

On start up Postgres checks if the `postgres` volume exists. If it does not exist, the volume is created using the contents of the `dev-env/data/postgres/datamart.sql.gz` file.

The ISI Datamart REST endpoints is `http://localhost:14080/`.

## Datasets

The Datamart comes with a few datasets pre-loaded. They include data from OECD, FSI, UAZ and WGI.

## Managing the Datamart Database

### Backing up the existing database

To backup the current Postgres database, run

    docker exec -it datamart-postgres /bin/bash
    # From inside the docker container
    pg_dump --user postgres wikidata | gzip > /backup/datamart-backup.sql.gz

The backup file is place in the `dev-env/data/postgres` directory.

### Adding datasets directly to the database

To add additional datasets in the form of a TSV file, switch to the scripts directory and run

    python import_tsv_postgres.py <filepath/to/tsv/file>

The script assumes the default Postgres username and password in `config.py`.

### Wiping existing database and updating with new content

To delete the existing database use the `--volumes` option to bring down docker compose. This command destroy the `postgres` volume.

    docker-compose down --volumes

Replace the `dev-env/data/postgres/datamart.sql.gz` file with the new `.sql.gz` file.

And, restart the system.

    docker-compose up

Commit message:

do not destroy database everytime

README.md, after:

# ISI Datamart

This git repository contains the ISI Datamart using REST endpoints.

The content of the Datamart is a set of datasets, which in turn consists of one or more variables. The Dataset Metadata Schema and the Variable Metadata schema are described here: [Metadata Schema](https://datamart-upload.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

The canonical data format used by the Datamart is the text delimited file (CSV). Details of the canonical data format and examples are here: [Canonical Data Format](https://datamart-upload.readthedocs.io/en/latest/download/)

Using the default configuration the Datamart REST URL is `http://localhost:14080/`. The details of the individual REST endpoints are described here: [Datamart REST API](https://datamart-upload.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/)

If for some reason your are running the development version of the Datamart, the URL is `http://localhost:5000/`

See examples in the Datamart Demo Jupyter notebook for sample usage: [Datamart Data API Demo](Datamart%20Data%20API%20Demo.ipynb)

## Installation

Edit the `docker/docker_config.py` file to change the Postgres user password.

Change to the `docker` directory and build the docker container.

    cd docker
    docker-compose build

This will build the backend container. It may take a while the first time you do it, as there are *a lot* of Python packages that need to be installed. Every time you change the source you should build the container again. Subsequent building runs will be faster.

## Running the System

From the `docker` directory and run

    docker-compose up -d

The docker compose yaml file, `docker-compose.yml`, uses docker compose version 3.7.

On start up Postgres checks if the `postgres` volume exists. If it does not exist, the volume is created using the contents of the `dev-env/data/postgres/datamart.sql.gz` file.

The ISI Datamart REST endpoints is `http://localhost:14080/`.

## Datasets

The Datamart comes with a few datasets pre-loaded. They include data from OECD, FSI, UAZ and WGI.

## Managing the Datamart Database

### Backing up the existing database

To backup the current Postgres database, run

    docker exec -it datamart-postgres /bin/bash
    # From inside the docker container
    pg_dump --user postgres wikidata | gzip > /backup/datamart-backup.sql.gz

The backup file is place in the `dev-env/data/postgres` directory.

### Adding datasets directly to the database

To add additional datasets in the form of a TSV file, switch to the scripts directory and run

    python import_tsv_postgres.py <filepath/to/tsv/file>

The script assumes the default Postgres username and password in `config.py`.

### Shutting down the dockers

To bring the docker down, from the `docker` folder, run
```
    docker-compose down
```
This command safely shut downs the dockers, saving the database. Next time dockers are brought up, the data will still be there and the load time is considerably
faster than the first time.

### Wiping existing database and updating with new content

To delete the existing database use the `--volumes` option to bring down docker compose. This command destroys the `postgres` volume.

    docker-compose down --volumes
    
**IMPORTANT: this command will wipe out the database. To simply shutdown the docker, run `docker-compose down` instead**

Replace the `dev-env/data/postgres/datamart.sql.gz` file with the new `.sql.gz` file.

And, restart the system.

    docker-compose up
